---
title:  "It's All About (Loose) Coupling"
date:   2022-11-15 12:00:00 -0500
categories: programming
logo: /assets/logos/JavaFXLogo.png
ScreenSnap: /assets/posts/StarterFX.png
GitHubDialog: /assets/posts/StarterFX-GitHub.png
Diagram: /assets/posts/MVCI.png
excerpt: We're going to look at some of the less obvious types of coupling that can creep into your code.
---

# Introduction

I'm going to go out on a limb here and say that of all of the considerations when designing or coding a system, coupling is the most important.  I'll also say that tight coupling is the number one issue that makes systems hard to build and maintain.

Coupling is the big scary thing that you need to deal with as you type every line of code.  

From WikiPedia:

> ...coupling is the degree of interdependence between software modules; a measure of how closely connected two routines or modules are; the strength of the relationships between modules.

The problem with coupling is that it makes it very difficult to do two things:

Understand a System
: When a system has a great deal of interdependence between elements, then it becomes more necessary to understand how all of those elements work in order to understand any one element.

Modify, Debug and Extend a System
: When there is tight coupling between elements, then changes to any one element start to have "ripple effect" through the whole system.  The first change alters the way some other element behaves, and correcting that impacts another element and so on.  Eventually, making any change to the system becomes a test of nerves.

For this discussion, we're going to put aside all of the common types of coupling that you can read about on [WikiPedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coupling_(computer_programming)) because... you can read about them on WikiPedia.  Instead we'll try to focus on things you might not see as coupling, and aspects of writing good code that reduce coupling.

# Coupling and "Clean Code"

While I'm out on that limb, I'm also going to say the the main purpose of most of the techniques that we generally consider to be "clean code", are aimed a limiting coupling.  This includes the "S.O.L.I.D" principles, DRY (Don't Repeat Yourself), and host of other things.

# "Hiding", "Revealing" and "Knowing"

In many cases, the best way to think about coupling is in terms of "hiding", "revealing" and "knowing".  You'll see these terms used to explain coupling over and over again in the rest of this article.  Let's take a look at what they mean for coupling:

Hiding and Revealing
: This is the fundamental workings of loose coupling.  Elements of your system should hide as much as they can about themselves so that other elements cannot abuse them.  An element should reveal only as much about itself as it absolutely has to in order to fulfill its role.

Knowing
: This is about how much code in one element uses its knowledge of the inner workings of some other element to do its work.  As soon as you use that knowledge, you've instantly created a dependency to the insides of that other element.

"Coupling" tends to be an abstract term, and a little bit tougher to think about in practical terms.  But if you think in terms of hiding as much as possible in every case, revealing as little as you can get away about and try not know about the insides of other things in the system, then it's easier to write better code.

# Types of Coupling

## Non-Private Methods

Non-private methods are the number one way that classes in Java reveal things about themselves to other classes.  Every single non-private method that you add to a class ties you down just a little bit more because it exposes your class to potential coupling.  

### Getters and Setters

Everybody *knows* that you're supposed to make all fields private, and to provide getters and setters for those fields so that other classes can have access to the data.  This is a strategy against coupling - those other classes know that they can get the data, but they don't have access to the implementation of that data inside the class.  These leaves you free to change the internal structure of the class without worrying about breaking other classes.  

Really though, you need to think of getters and setters in terms of services.  What is the *service* that each getter or setter provides?  What are other classes going to do with the data they get from a getter?  Do they actually need a setter?  What do you want to reveal about your class to other classes through the getters and setters?

What I'm really saying is that getters and setters should be designed thoughtfully, not just tossed into a class because you have fields.  

#### An Example: Names

Let's say we have a class that has some name fields: `firstName` and `lastName`, and they're just `Strings`.  Now we need to provide access to that data.  Do we just add a `getFirstName()` and `getLastName()` method to the class?  What are the calling methods going to do with the data from getters?  It's OK to ask this.  We're providing a service through these getters and we have a right to set boundaries around it.  We could just provide `getName()` and have that method put `firstName` and `lastName` together with a space between them.  Maybe that's the limit of how far we're willing to go.

Make no mistake, providing `getFirstName()` and `getLastName()` is going to tie us down somehow.  What happens if we decide to add a `middleName` field to our class?  Are we going to add a `getMiddleName()` method to our class?  Then do we need to chase down all the calling classes and modify them?  What if we add a field for suffix, like "Jr", "Sr", "II"?  How do we cope with that?

Central to all these questions is the idea of what class has the responsibility of putting the name in a format for use elsewhere?  You could make a very strong argument that it's our class with the data that has that responsibility.  Perhaps we need to provide a `getName()` method as described above.  Maybe we need to have a `getFullName()` that uses all of the parts.  Perhaps a `getCommaName()` that produces something like "Smith, Fred" would be needed.

What happens if we decide to create a special `Name` class, and use it instead of our `String` fields?  Now we can handle all of the funky edge cases, all the exceptions and rare cases like a multi-word last names (like "Van Der Kamp"), and proper casing of names like "McDonald" or "O'Brian" and those kinds of things.  And we can use this class **anywhere** that we have a name.  Now you really don't want all these calling methods using their own rule-base for formatting names.

With something like names, they don't change very often.  Do we need to have setters for these fields?  Probably not.

Now let's be clear, all of this stuff is really hard if you've implemented your class with `getFirstName()` and `getLastName()`.  Really hard.  But it's fairly easy if you just implemented `getName()` and let your class figure out how to deliver it.  

#### Getter Types

The other aspect of getters that shouldn't just be written without thought is the return type.  I'd be willing to bet that 99% of the time, programmers just return the same type as the field in their getters.  But is this always the right thing?

Let's say you've got a field in your class `age`, and it's just an `int`.  Should you create a getter, `getAge()` that returns `int`?  What are the units?  Years?  OK, let's say it's years.  What if you decide that you need to track closer than integer years, so you'll make it a `double`?  Now you're stuck.

Maybe you should make `getAge()` return `Number`.  Now the calling programs can use it as they want.  You'll still return an actual `int`, but it will be returned as `Number`.  

Maybe you should make `getAge()` return `Duration`.  There's no ambiguity in this.  `Duration` has all the unit stuff baked in.  You can still treat the data internally as `int`, but you can convert this to the number of years in a `Duration` value.  

The important thing is that it may make sense to treat `age` as an `int` internally inside your class.  Your code inside the class knows all about it and can deal with appropriately as an `int`.  If it causes grief in your code, it's going to be contained inside your class and it won't be an application-wide problem.  But if you let that `int` leak out through the getter, then it *becomes* an application-wide problem.  And should you decide to fix it by making it a `Duration` then that's going to have a ripple effect through your application.  

Once again, treat your getters like a *service*, not a data-access mechanism.  Treat them like a service from the start.

### Other Methods



## Implementation Instead of Interface

When I first started to program in Java, we used `ArrayList` all over the place.  It was easy to use, and we passed and returned values as `ArrayList` throughout a lot of our code.  Then Java 8 came along and we got `Streams`!  `Streams` were awesome, but...

`Stream.toList()` returns `List`.  Now we started using `Streams` and returning `List` instead of `ArrayList` and then passing the results around between methods, but those methods expected `ArrayList`.  There was nothing in any of this code that used any of the methods of `ArrayList` that weren't in the `List` interface, but we now had to do a major refactoring to change all of our parameters and return values to `List`.  

This was a newbie mistake, but illustrates another level of coupling.  None of the calling methods had any need to know that the returned `Lists` were `ArrayList`, but we chose to reveal that in our return values and then use that knowledge in our calling routines.  Then, when we changed the inner workings of those methods to something that didn't involve `ArrayList` we had that ripple effect throughout the whole code base.  And somewhere in there, there probably was one or two lines of code that actually tried to call an `ArrayList` method that isn't in `List`.

This goes even further.  Since all objects in Java exist in a hierarchy it's often possible to return something further up the hierarchy than the actual object passed back by a method.  Just so long as that parent object has whatever methods the code invoking it requires.  For instance, if the only method that you want the invoking code to be able to call on a returned object is `toString()`, then you could just return `Object`.  Perhaps more realistically, you could return `Number`instead of `int`, or `double`.

This happens a lot with `Builder` methods in JavaFX.  Often, a `Builder` is returning a component that's going to have nothing more done to it than to put it into a layout.  In that case you don't want to expose some of the particular methods of specific component classes.  Like the `setOnAction()` method in `Button`.  So you don't return `Button`, you return `Node` which is pretty much the top level class for all the screen components.  Sometimes you want the layout code to be able to set the maximum width of the return component, in which case you'd return `Region` which is a bit lower down than `Node` and is the top level class for all of the layout classes.  

The big takeaway here is that you should give some careful thought to the values that return from your methods, and not just return whatever type is actually created inside the method code.  Ask yourself about how much the calling routines should able to know about the data that's being returned and return an appropriate type.

## Mutable Fields and Variables

I spent years and years working in various dialects of Pick BASIC.  It's pretty old-school.  Structured with GOSUB but no formal "method" or "function" declarations with passed parameters.  Variables were all untyped and without any scoping.  The implications of all of this are that every variable is global, even if in a subroutine, and you can put just about anything in any variable at any time without any restrictions.

You could have things like this:

``` bbcbasic
   X = "25"
   .
   .
   X = (X : "17") + 1
   .
   .
   X = "GEORGE"
```
And it would work just fine.  

It wasn't unusual to have program files with 3K to 5K lines of code and dozens of subroutines, and any variable used anywhere was available anywhere else.  The result was that any attempt at maintenance was a test of nerve.  It was very hard to know if any particular variable had the value that you expected it at any given time because literally any of the code could modify it.  And some variables were updated dozens of times in dozens of different places.  It was also very hard to know what would happen if you changed a variable because, once again, it could be used in dozens of places.

It's all due, of course, to coupling.  Any code that uses a global variable is tightly coupled to every other piece of code that uses the same global variable.  Actually, it's coupled to all the other code in the file because you have to go searching to find all of the uses - any code anywhere could use anything!

Much of this would be a non-issue if variables could be made non-mutable.  Non-mutable variables can't be changed, so you don't have to pour over hundreds of lines of code looking for it on the left side of an equals sign.

Kotlin takes this to a new place in the Java world.  Variables and fields in Kotlin need to be declared as mutable or immutable using the `var` or `val` keywords, with the convention being to prefer immutable whenever possible.  In the Kotlin code I've written, about 90%+ of my variables are immutable.

In Java, we have `final` and you should use it whenever you can.  Prefer local variables over instance variables whenever possible too.  And don't make variables `static` unless absolutely necessary.  

Of course, `final` isn't used anywhere as often as it should be.  It's rare to find local variables declared as `final` in most code.  Programmers only think about `final` variables when they use one in a lambda and they get that compiler warning about "variables is a lambda must be final or effectively final".  Even then, the usual response it to look for a wrapper class like `Atomic` to put the value in to get around the `final` requirement.

## Duplicate Code

Most programmers don't think about duplicate code as coupling, but it really is.  Really, what could be more "interdependent" about two blocks of code than if they contain the same code?

I've seen people argue that you can overdo DRY ("Don't Repeat Yoursef").  The idea being that if you've pulled the duplicate code out into a separate method and call it instead of having duplicated code, then any time you touch that method you have to worry about **all** of the places that might call it.

This is nonsense.  Not that that you have to worry about all the places that call it, but the idea that if it's duplicated then you don't.  

If you touch a piece of code that's duplicated, then you have to ask yourself, "Do I need to make this same change in the duplications?"  The tricky part is that with duplicate code, a number of things might happen:

You Cannot Find, or You're Not Aware of the Duplicates
:  If you have a method, then it's super easy with modern IDE's to find all the places that the method is called.  It's hard NOT to be aware of how a method is used.  But with duplicate code you don't have that facility, so you have to go looking.  And why would you even look?

It's Hard to Understand the Impact on Duplicate Code
:  Very often, duplicate code isn't 100% identical in every place that you encounter it.  There's always a different value checked, or a calculation is slightly different, or something like that.  When you touch code that's been duplicated you have to figure out whether or not you're touching the stuff that really is duplicated.  When you pull it out to a separate method, you generally parameterize the differences, so that the calls to the method hold the differences, not the duplicated code.  Now, when you make a change, are you making a change to the call, or are you making a change to the method?

You Mess Something Up
:  There is probably no more effective source of trivial bugs than duplicated code and copy/paste.  If you have to do something 5 times over, each just a tiny bit different, then that's 5 times as many chances to make a mistake.

One other important point about DRY:  Employing DRY generally forces you to think about the structure of what you're building.  It makes you understand that you have shared functionality in your system and requires that you identify it and organize it.  DRY doesn't really remove coupling, but it brings it out into the open and puts structure around it that makes it easier to manage.

## Feature Envy

This really comes down to putting code in the right place.  One anti-pattern that you see all the time is something like this:

``` java
   private int sampleMethod(ClassA classA, int somethingElse) {
     return (classA.getValue1() * classA.getValue2()) + (somethingElse * classA.calculateSomething());
   }
```

What we have here is a block of code that repeatedly calls methods in another class to derive a result based almost exclusively on those method calls.  In other words, this code really has very little to do with the class in which it resides.

This is called "Feature Envy".  In this example, `sampleMethod()` represents a feature in the class in which it appears but really shouldn't belong to it.  It should be a feature of `ClassA`.

A far better way to write this:

``` java
   private int betterMethod(ClassA classA, int somethingElse) {
      return classA.sampleMethod(somethingElse);
   }
```
And `ClassA.sampleMethod()` would contain the calculation from the first code snippet.

From a coupling perspective, we've now exposed only one non-private method of `ClassA`, instead of 3.  So that's a win.  But almost certainly, the meaning of that calculation is something that relates to `ClassA`, not whatever class it was originally found in.  

And it's clear that if something about `ClassA` changes, maybe the meaning of whatever is returned from one or both of the two getters, for instance, then the meaning of the result of that calculation changes.  If it's contained within `ClassA`, however, then that change can be handled inside `ClassA` without needing to worry about a ripple effect.

## Breaking the Single Responsibility Principle

What?  This is coupling?

Sure it is.  

When you have a block of code that does more than one thing, those two functions are effectively coupled.  You can't touch one without touching the other.  

Understand that the "Single Responsibility Principle" refers to "direct responsibility".  It's virtually impossible to create system that does anything worthwhile without having at least one method that does more than one thing.  The key is to delegate each of those things to separate methods, then your delegating method is only directly responsible for bringing all of the delegated results together.  

When you've delegated the responsibilities to separate methods, the coupling is broken.  Code in one method can be changed without worrying that code in another method will be broken.  Of course, if the methods have other coupling, such as mutating class fields, you'll still need to worry about that.

## The Law of Demeter

This is a slam dunk because the "Law of Demeter" is, by definition, a rule about loose coupling.

The most common example of the Law of Demeter is when you have stacked object composition.  For instance you have a field in an class which is another class, and that class in turn has a field which is another class and so on.  The result is that you can get situations like this:

``` java
   something = classA.getField1().getField6().getField3().getField2();
```

Now our code here has to know not only that `classA` has `getField1()`, but it has to know that whatever type `getField1()` returns has a `getField6()` method.  And then, of course, that that class has a `getField3()` method and so on.  But if the object returned by `classA.getField1()` isn't just a utility class like `ArrayList` or `Map`, is there any good reason for our code to know that `classA` has whatever is returned by `classA.getField1()` in it?

And, of course, if anything changes in any of those 4 classes, this could might stop working.

From the perspective of coupling, it's far better to have a single call:

``` java
something = classA.getSomething();
```
Where:
```
public classA;
   .
   .
   public SomeClass getSomething(){
     return field1.getSomething();
   }
}
```
and:
```
public classXYZ;
   .
   .
   public SomeClass getSomething() {
     return field6.getSomething();
   }
}
```
Of course, it needn't be called `getSomething()` all the way down the chain.
