---
title:  "Getting Started With Proxmox LXC Containers"
date:   2025-10-20 12:00:00 -0500
categories: homelab
logo: /assets/logos/JavaFXLogo.png
permalink: /homelab/proxmox
M910Q: /assets/homelab/M910Q-Front-Back.png
Stack: /assets/homelab/M910Q-stack.jpg
M910_Inside_Top: /assets/homelab/M910Q-top.jpg
M910_Inside_Bottom: /assets/homelab/M910Q-bottom.jpg
M910Q_Specs: /assets/homelab/ThinkCentre_M910_Tiny_Spec.PDF
M710Q_Specs: /assets/homelab/ThinkCentre_M710_Tiny_Spec.PDF
Stack1k: /assets/homelab/ThinkCentre_M710_Tiny_Spec.PD
Stack1: /assets/homelab/M910Q-Front-Back.png



Diagram: /assets/elements/ListProperties.png
OLArticle: /javafx/elements/observable-classes-lists
ABGuide: /beginners/intro
GitHubLink: https://github.com/thomasnield/ConstrainedProperty
InstallationLink: https://pve.proxmox.com/pve-docs/chapter-pve-installation.html
CommunityScripts: https://community-scripts.github.io/ProxmoxVE/

JavaDocOL: https://openjfx.io/javadoc/23/javafx.base/javafx/collections/ObservableList.html
JavaDocFXC: https://openjfx.io/javadoc/23/javafx.base/javafx/collections/FXCollections.html

excerpt: "A look at the Lenovo M910Q Tiny computers I've chosen as homelab servers."
---

# Introduction

If you are going to self-host a number of services, you are going to need a number of servers to provide them.  While it is possible - and sometimes advisable - to run multiple services on a single server, it's often best to run each service on its own server.  This avoids conflicts over server resources between services and can make it easier to manage.  This is especially true when each service installation is an exercise in trial-and-error to configure things properly - and this is probably what you are going to experience.

However, buying and setting up a physical server for each service can quickly become expensive, time consuming and consume a lot of power.  This is where "virtual" servers come into play.

## Virtual Servers

A working computer is some kind of hardware with an operating system running on it.  The operating system sits between the hardware and your application software and handles all of the access to the system resources on the hardware.  This includes the CPU, the memory, the USB devices, the monitors, keyboard and networking, along with a lot more.  You may need a different version of an application to run on each type of operationg system, but you generally don't need different versions to run on different hardware.  The operating system handles that for you.

The operating system itself, however, is just software that's been stored on disk, configured for the particular hardware and then loaded at boot time.  You could have many different operating systems stored on a computer and then pick which ever one you want to load when you boot the computer.  You can clone a computer, including all of the application software that has been installed on it, by simply coping the operating system onto a new disk in a second computer and then booting that second computer from it.  This will work as long as the hardware is close enough between the two computers.

You should be able to see that a "computer" is actually just data that installed onto some hardware.  You can treat it as data.

It turns out that you can write software that sits between on operating system and the hardware that it's running on, and that pretends to be the hardware to that operating system.  Now the operating system isn't interacting with the hardware directly, it's interacting with this new layer of software.  

This new layer of "in between" software becomes the actual operating system that the computer is running. It's the piece that actually interacts with hardware of the computer.  The operating system that it is hosting is now divorced from the hardware and it's not a physical computer any more - we call it a "Virtual Machine".

From inside the virtual machine, it's almost impossible to tell that it's not running directly on a physical computer.  From outside the virtualized environment, it's equally as difficult to determine whether or not the server that you are connecting to is physical or virtual.

What's even more important, is that this virtualized environment can run more than one virtual machine at the same time.  In fact, it can run as many virtual machines as you like, until the point where the physical resources of the hardware are over-taxed.

The software that provides this virtualized environment is called a "Hypervisor".  From Wikipedia:

> The term hypervisor is a variant of supervisor, a traditional term for the kernel of an operating system: the hypervisor is the supervisor of the supervisors,[2] with hyper- used as a stronger variant of super-

## Hypervisor Software

Hypervisors have been around for a long time, but started to become extremely common in the 21st century.  

At the last place that I worked, we started out with a very small number of physical servers in 1995, and then kept adding physical servers over time.  Eventually this got out of hand, especially for the small IT shop that we were.  At some point we purchased about 3 "blade" servers to run everything.  These were multi-socket systems with either 4 or 8 cpu chips and, if I remember correctly, about 196GB of memory.  We converted virtually all of our physical servers to virtual servers and ran everything off these three blades.  Eventually, we moved from our own hardware to cloud-based computing.  But it was still largely the same thing, virtual machines running in a cloud-based hypervisor.

Back in those days, there were really just two viable alternatives.  VMWare and Microsoft's Hyper-V.  VMWare was a bit more mature, but both worked well.  Neither was particulaly cheap for commercial use, IIRC, although both had free (or nearly free) versions for non-commercial uses.  Like homelabs.

My understanding is that after being aquired by Broadcom, VMWare has made a number of pricing and licensing changes that have driven away a number of homelab users.  They also dropped support for EIAx, which many homelab users relied on.

From what I can see, VMWare is still widely used but may be losing some of its user base.  Hyper-V is (I believe) Windows based, so appeals mostly to those heavily invested in a Windows infrastructure (not me!), and has a smaller user base.  

Many people are now using Proxmox, which is what I have chosen to go with.  It's free and opensource, and has more than enough capabilities and features to do whatever I need.  

# Installing Proxmox

I've done this 4 times now and found the installation process to be trivial.  The actual steps are dependent on the hardware that you have, so I'll restrict myself to a broad description of the process, and let you read the detail from the [Proxmox website]({{page.InstallationLink}}).

Create a boot image on a USB drive

: This is dead simple if you are using Linux as I do.  If you are using Windows then you'll probably have to install Etcher or Rufus to create a bootable USB thumbdrive.  In Linux, you'll probably have a compatible utility already installed.

Boot your computer to the BIOS Screen

: You'll need to boot your Proxmox host computer twice.  Hook up a monitor and a keyboard, and maybe a mouse, plug in a cable between the ethernet port and a network switch and turn the computer on.  Start hammering on whatever keys your computer needs to bring up the BIOS menu.  Then go into the BIOS settings and make sure that the hardware virtualizing is turned on.  What this will be called will depend on the system.  Proxmox indicates that for Intel based systems this will be called "Intel VT" and for AMD based ones it will called "AMD-V".  It might also jus be referred to as "KVM" virtualization.

Reboot your computer and get to the boot device menu

: Stick your USB drive into a port, save whatever changes that you made to the BIOS, and restart the computer.  Hammer on whichever key wil bring up the "Boot Devices" menu, which may be different than the one in the previous step.  Pick the USB drive.  On some systems, you may not have this menu, so you'll have to configure the boot device order (specify the USB device as the primary) in the BIOS settings.

Follow the instructions in the Proxmox installation screens

: Proxmox won't let you proceed if you haven't turned on the hardware virtualization.  But if you have, then you'll get a menu.  You can go graphical or text, it doesn't really matter.  The options you'll be presented with are fairly straight-forward and obvious, involving time-zones, keyboard layouts, ip addresses and passwords.  You're probably best off picking ext4 as the file system type on your first installation, but that's also the default.  

Take out the USB drive and reboot

: At some point you'll be prompted to do this.  Just follow the instructions.  You don't even need the keyboard, mouse and monitor at this point, as this is now a headless server that you'll manage mostly through it's browser interface.

Log into the management interface

: Once it's all done, surf over to port 8006 on whatever IP address you specified during the installation process. You'll need to log in using the password you supplied, and then you should see the management interface.  Now you're running Proxmox!

It's possible something might go wrong, but otherwise it really is that simple.

# Proxmox Basics

Let's have a quick look at the features of Proxmox, and how to use them...

## Clustering

If you're like me, you've chosen to use a few inexpensive computers as Proxmox hosts rather than one powerful computer.  In this case, you might as well get them all up and running and then link them together into a cluster.  Once they are in a cluster, you can use a single browser session to see all of the hosts and manage them at the same time.  You can also move your VM's around between the hosts quite easily.

At this point, and certainly if you have less than three hosts, don't attempt to set up "High Availability" on your cluster.

## Creating Virtual Systems

This is the heart and soul of what you'll use Promox for, and everything else is just to support this working smoothly.  Proxmox supports two kinds of virtual guests: Virtual Machines (VM's) and Linux Containers (LXC's)...

### Virtual Machines

Virtual Machines are the "old school" approach to virtualization.  In truth, they are a little bit more versatile than LXC's because the can be any kind of operation system that you can find an image for.  If you hate yourself enough to want a Windows server, then you'll be able to do it with a VM.

I'll be honest here:  I'm new enough to this that I've implemented everything I can using LXC's.  Even my Docker host system is an LXC.  In fact, I have only two VM's; my HomeAssistant server and my OpenMediaVault server.  And that's because they only come as VM's when installed from the Community Scripts.  

VM's reveal themselves to be much more independant than LXC's when you configure them.  They generally require you to dedicate memory to them.  So if you allocate 8GB to a VM, it takes it at boot time and keeps it.  You can use something called "ballooning", but that requires that the guest O/S supports it.  

They are a little more fussy when setting up device passthrough and other associated settings.  My understanding is because a VM has to be able to support any operating system you might place into it.  LXC's guests, on the other hand, will always be Linux systems compatible with the node Linux kernel.  

So, for the rest of this article, I'm going to concern myself with LXC's, and not worry too much about VM's.  If you're new to this, you'll probably be more interested in LXC's anyways...

### LXC's

In a nutshell, an LXC is a lightweight VM that shares its kernel with the host machine.  This has the following advantages:

1. They are smaller than VM's and consume less resources because they don't have their own kernel.
1. They use less system resources since they don't have their own kernel.
1. They use system resources more dynamically.
1. They "spin up" in seconds, even when brand new.

However, some people don't like them because:

1. They are not truly isolated from the host o/s and other LXC's.  If your LXC becomes compromised in some way, it could compromise your host, and any other LXC's on that host.
1. If they cause a kernel panic and crash, it's your host kernel that's panicked and your host that's crashed.

Personally, I'm taking great care to make sure that my network structure is secure and that I'm not opening anything up to the outside world, including people that visit and connect to my WiFi.  I'm also using reverse proxies to isolate acccess to my services from the actual servers themselves.  All of which works to minimize the importance of item (1) above.

As to item (2)...In almost a year, I've only ever had one system take down a host node, and that system was a VM.

The other thing to note is that, since they share the host's kernel, they can only be Linux systems.  If you want to run a Windows instance, you'll have to use a true VM.

I'll leave it up to you to do your own research and decide if LXC's are something that you want to use.

Linux containers come in two flavours...

#### Privileged vs Unprivileged Containers

When you create an LXC, you'll come across an checkbox that says "Not privileged", and it's default value is "true", or, if you like, "checked".  This is very important.

The difference is actually quite simple.  In a privileded container, the "root" user is the same as in the host.  This means that the root user in the container has full access to everything in the host that "root" has in the host.  This means devices and files.  Everything.

In an unprivileged container, the "root" user is not the same user as in the host.  This means that it does not have universal access to the host resources.

Unless you have a very specific reason to do otherwise, create every LXC instance as "unprivileged".  99% of the time, this will have no impact anything you want to do inside your container.  However, you won't be able to do some things like create NFS mounts, that require root access to networking resources.  There are often ways around this that don't involve making your LXC privileged.

Once you've spun up an LXC it's virtually indistinguishable from a regular VM from inside the container.  You can use "apt" to install software, you can execute any Linux command.  It feels the same as having a full-blown VM, or even a physical Linux server.

#### The Process

At the top right corner of the main screen in Proxmox there's a button that says "Create CT".  Click it and it will bring up a dialogue box that runs through a creation workflow.  There are 5 tabs that you'll need to work through.  The first looks like this:


### Using Community Scripts

Another very convenient way to create a guest machine, either LXC or VM is via the [Proxmox VE Helper-Scripts]({{page.CommunityScripts}}).  At the time of this writing, there are 433 scripts that you can choose from, divided into 26 categories.  

Most of these scripts automate the creation of virtual servers into a process that is absolutely trivial.  You open up a console session on your host node, then paste a bash command from the script's webpage into the console.  That command will download the script and run it.  Most of the scripts will launch a text-based dialogue box that will ask a bunch of fairly standardized questions, and then it will create the LXC or VM for you, start it up and then run a process to install and configure whatever software the script is designed to install.  At the end, you'll have a running virtual guest with minimal work.

# Sharing Node Resources

Part of defining a guest O/S in Proxmox (or any other virtualizing environment) is to define how that guest O/S will be able to access the resources of the host node.  

One of the key concepts to understand is that in most virtualized environments, most of your guest servers are going to be largely idle most of the time.  This especially true of homelabs, where the number of users is limited and the number of servers they can be engaging with at any given time is also limited.  

In a more general sense, this is largely why virtualization is particularly attractive.  A fairly modest amount of system resources can actually translate into a large number of hosted services without running into performance issues.

Let's take a look at the resources that you can define:

## CPU

You're node is going to have some quantity of physical CPU's or cores.  Obviously, you cannot allocate more cores to any single guest than you physically have.  However, deciding how many cores to allocate can be a little tricky.

If you are installing a guest from the community scripts, it will tell you what the recommended number of cores is.  You can generally go with that.  

Understand that a guest that has a very low need for CPU isn't going to use a lot of cores, even if you allocate more to it.  Especially with LXC, which seem to be very dynamic in the way that they use host resources.  The real decisions come with those guests that potentially could use all of the CPU that you allocate, and making sure that they have enough to run properly without having a significant impact on other guests.  

Before I set up Frigate to manage my security cameras, the only time I ever saw any guest gobble up all the CPU it could was when I loaded 1000's of images into Immich.  The AI processing involved with how Immich digests new images is fairly intense.  But how often do you upload 1000's of images?  For me, it was only when I first set up the Immich accounts for my wife and myself.

## Memory

This is the other big consideration.  LXC's win big time here.  Since they don't have their own kernel, they don't need anywhere near as much memory as a VM.  I have a number of utility LXC's set up that only have 512MB allocated to them, and they work fine.  

Once again, you *can*, or actually *should* allocate more memory in total than you have physical memory.  Guests will use what they need as they need it.  Just like with CPU, you should think of memory allocation as *limits* to how much a memory hungry guest can use such that it doesn't impact other guests.

## Swap Space

OK, swap is pontentially a super complicated subject that is way beyond the scope of an article like this.  In a nutshell...

Swap is disk space that is allocated to store RAM data that is relatively not active.  To any processes running that use that RAM, it's still there and available.  If it's needed, then the system will copy some other RAM into the disk swap space to free up room in the physical RAM and put that data back.  

This is a good system and generally works well.  It's possible for systems that are very active and constrained in RAM to do something called, "thrashing", which is where the CPU spends all of its time shuttling data back and forth between RAM and swap space and never gets a chance to do any actual work.  

You should think of swap space as a backstop against running out of RAM and having something horrible happen.  Most Linux systems really don't like running out of memory.  

The old rules used to be to allocate 2X the size of the RAM allocated.  That's true for smaller sizes of memory, but if you're allocating anything more than 4GB to a guest, then 4GB of swap should be enough.  Of course, you may need more if whatever software that you're running in the guest does something strange.  

What I generally see is that swap space is very slow to be cleared out.  Like, it can take days.  This gives you a good opportunity to notice that some guest has consumed a lot of swap since it was started up.  If you see that happening, then you can reconfigure your guest to give it more memory or swap space.

If you see that a guest has 100% of its swap space used up, then something bad has generally happened.  Rethink your memory and swap allocation and restart the guest.  Even if you don't change the allocation, restart the guest.

## Networking

This is potentially super complicated, but in practice usually super simple.  

Your guest O/S will share the whatever physical networking that the host has, but it will have its own IP address.  This sharing is done through something called a "bridge".  Out of the box, if you have a single ethernet port on the host, then you'll have a single bridge called "vmbr0" set up for you by default that connects to that ethernet port.

Then, when you set up a guest, you tell it to use that bridge, `vmbr0`.  All of the guests can share that bridge.  

## Disks  

When a Proxmox node is set up, it will generally have a "main" disk drive that is dedicated to running the Proxmox environment.  This is going to consist of two parts:  the first is for the operationg system for the node itself; the second is for the guest images.  Let's talk about this second part...

Seen from the node, the guest images are logical volumes of the main disk.  Here's the output from `lsblk -f`:

``` bash
NAME                         FSTYPE      FSVER    LABEL UUID                                   FSAVAIL FSUSE% MOUNTPOINTS
nvme0n1                                                                                                       
|-nvme0n1p1                                                                                                   
|-nvme0n1p2                  vfat        FAT32          9DEA-BD50                                1013M     1% /boot/efi
`-nvme0n1p3                  LVM2_member LVM2 001       z2E6Vr-OlNV-kxqp-zAHx-gVZq-GhxE-aaXK89                
  |-pve-swap                 swap        1              33a6ee0a-0416-48a5-920c-f3fa6bc653ab                  [SWAP]
  |-pve-root                 ext4        1.0            c0111f26-f6ca-49d5-8ae1-6d259fb6600a     41.7G    33% /
  |-pve-data_tmeta                                                                                            
  | `-pve-data-tpool                                                                                          
  |   |-pve-data                                                                                              
  |   |-pve-vm--101--disk--0 ext4        1.0            20001e25-176a-4847-b4e1-a5171cad627a                  
  |   |-pve-vm--103--disk--0 ext4        1.0            14912f23-1854-4bf2-947d-072e111f7daa                  
  |   |-pve-vm--104--disk--0 ext4        1.0            55153c3b-2e4e-4340-93c4-628f5397b55a                  
  |   |-pve-vm--105--disk--0 ext4        1.0            3c5f0518-9e6a-4ab4-adc6-a9b2d09f8b4a                  
  |   |-pve-vm--111--disk--0 ext4        1.0            09e24ddc-c7bb-4f52-a136-9eae2f13b353                  
  |   |-pve-vm--128--disk--0 ext4        1.0            ac8658ca-8d0c-42dc-8ef0-a1c5363076e4                  
  |   |-pve-vm--136--disk--0 ext4        1.0            e81f85ba-d9e9-459a-857a-1d52930c0217                  
  |   |-pve-vm--126--disk--0 ext4        1.0            6f9847b4-1d4a-43fc-b347-eb3c8071209f                  
  |   `-pve-vm--138--disk--0 ext4        1.0            44cf442e-50c1-4c99-a815-8b3d3ff4c82d                  
  `-pve-data_tdata                                                                                            
    `-pve-data-tpool                                                                                          
      |-pve-data                                                                                              
      |-pve-vm--101--disk--0 ext4        1.0            20001e25-176a-4847-b4e1-a5171cad627a                  
      |-pve-vm--103--disk--0 ext4        1.0            14912f23-1854-4bf2-947d-072e111f7daa                  
      |-pve-vm--104--disk--0 ext4        1.0            55153c3b-2e4e-4340-93c4-628f5397b55a                  
      |-pve-vm--105--disk--0 ext4        1.0            3c5f0518-9e6a-4ab4-adc6-a9b2d09f8b4a                  
      |-pve-vm--111--disk--0 ext4        1.0            09e24ddc-c7bb-4f52-a136-9eae2f13b353                  
      |-pve-vm--128--disk--0 ext4        1.0            ac8658ca-8d0c-42dc-8ef0-a1c5363076e4                  
      |-pve-vm--136--disk--0 ext4        1.0            e81f85ba-d9e9-459a-857a-1d52930c0217                  
      |-pve-vm--126--disk--0 ext4        1.0            6f9847b4-1d4a-43fc-b347-eb3c8071209f                  
      `-pve-vm--138--disk--0 ext4        1.0            44cf442e-50c1-4c99-a815-8b3d3ff4c82d                  
```
You can see that all the action is on `nvme0n1p3`.  Here `pve-root` is the O/S volume for the node itself, and entries like `pve-vm--101--disk--0` are the images of the various guests.

We can look at them as logical volumes with `lvs`:

``` bash
lvs
  LV            VG  Attr       LSize    Pool Origin Data%  Meta%  Move Log Cpy%Sync Convert
  data          pve twi-aotz-- <141.23g             42.05  2.49                            
  root          pve -wi-ao----  <69.37g                                                    
  swap          pve -wi-ao----    8.00g                                                    
  vm-101-disk-0 pve Vwi-aotz--    4.00g data        67.92                                  
  vm-103-disk-0 pve Vwi-aotz--   24.00g data        83.19                                  
  vm-104-disk-0 pve Vwi-aotz--   10.00g data        46.88                                  
  vm-105-disk-0 pve Vwi-aotz--    7.00g data        27.99                                  
  vm-111-disk-0 pve Vwi-aotz--   18.00g data        51.99                                  
  vm-126-disk-0 pve Vwi-aotz--    8.00g data        18.74                                  
  vm-128-disk-0 pve Vwi-aotz--    8.00g data        24.20                                  
  vm-133-disk-0 pve Vwi---tz--    4.00g data                                               
  vm-136-disk-0 pve Vwi-aotz--    4.00g data        48.92                                  
  vm-138-disk-0 pve Vwi-aotz--   20.00g data        64.48      
```
You don't need to understand all this to get the idea.  When you create a guest you specify how much disk space you want it to have in its native environment.  Proxmox then allocates some disk space out of that main drive for that new guest and it creates a volume with it.  When the guest is created, its operating system and core storage are all placed in that volume.  

In my case, I have 256GB SSD's as my main disk in all of my nodes.  About 70GB is allocated to run the Proxmox host, with about 8GB for swap.  The remaining 141GB is allocated for guest storage.  

The other thing to know is that the standard guest storage is called "Thin LVM", which means that the space allocated for each guest is not actually consumed by that guest until it needs it.  You can see that `vm-128` has a size of 8GB but a usage of only 24.20%.  This means that this guest is actually only using up about 2.2GB of real disk space.  

The take-away from this is that you can over-allocate disk space, and you're only going to run into trouble when the amount of disk space that's actually used in the aggregate is more than your physical disk space.  

## Other Disks

If you have come from the world of Windows, then Linux disk management probably feel freaky and weird to you.  There's none of this drive letter rubbish, and the reality of the disk space of a system being spread across different physical devices is largely invisible to software and users of that system.  

At the bare metal end, you can have different physical disks.  These are either directly attached to the O/S as devices (after partitioning), or they may be attached through a "Logical Volume Manager" (LVM).  An LVM will manage multiple physical disks and handle partitioning, mirroring, or striping across them and present them as logical volumes.  These logical volumes can then be presented to the O/S and treated just like physical devices, which can also be partitioned.  

The next level up is a file system.  Generally, a file system occupies a disk partition and has been formatted an set up to hold real data in some particular way.  

File systems are "mounted" into other file systems.  For the most part, each system has a single "root" file system and mount points for other file systems are usually located there.  A mount point is just an empty directory.  The system can be set up to automatically mount any number of file systems onto specific mount points at boot time.  It's also possible to mount files systems from other Linux computers using something called the "Network File System" (NFS).

Once mounted, it becomes unobvious that a file system isn't just part of the file system into which it has been mounted.  Even an NFS mount just looks like another directory.  Of course, you might have performance issues with NFS mounted file systems if your network isn't up to it.

In Proxmox, that volume that is allocated to your guest provides the space for the root file system, as well as swap space and some other things.  In my systems this NVME SSD storage, which is fast but relatively expensive and limited in size.  There's no way that I'm going to store hundreds of gigabytes of image files on these disks.  

That means we need to access other disks from our Proxmox guests.

### Internal Disks

My Lenovo M910Q's all have a single tray for 2.5" SATA drive of some sort, with the caveat that it can only be 7mm thick.  I've got one of my three nodes populated with a 1TB HDD.  

Proxmox gives you all the tool that you need in order to expose a drive like this to the guests.  But it probably gives you too many choices.  

For general purpose use, your best bet is to partition your drive, create file systems and mount them on the Promox node as file systems.  In other words, set it up just like you would for any disk that you were going to use directly from any Linux system.  

Then, in the guest create an empty directory to serve as a mount point inside the guest, something like `/mnt/diskfromhost`.  

For the last step, you'll need to edit the configuration file for the guest on the Proxmox node, then you add a line like this:

``` Bash

```
Unfortunately, you cannot do this just using the Proxmox GUI.  You'll have to edit the file directly.

### USB Disks

USB disks present another option for connecting drives that you don't have with internal disks:  You can also treat them as USB devices.

By this I mean that you can simply expose the USB device to the guest system, and let the guest system deal with it as a USB drive directly.  I don't feel that this is the best way to approach this.  

Handle them exactly the same way as you would with an internal drive.  Set it up and connect to it at the host level, create file systems and mount them as file systems in the Proxmox host.  Then edit the configuration file to pass them to the LXC container from the mount point.  


# Backups

The key thing to remember is that your guest systems, whether LXC, Docker Image or VM, are just data.  Every last one of them has a block of disk space on the host reserved for it, and this includes the entire O/S and any integrated storage that it uses.

This means that you can treat them just like data for some purposes, and this includes backups.  

Proxmox has three methods of backups.  Let's take a look at them.

## Snapshots

Snapshots aren't backups per se, but they provide an efficient way to reset a container back to a known state.  I've been using snapshots as a defensive technique when configuring and tweaking containers, especially those that or stable or working well before I decide to mess with them.  

Taking a snapshot is super simple and only takes a few seconds.  It's so easy that I'm inclined to take multiple snapshots as I go along, in case some later step messing things up.

## Regular Backups


## Proxmox Backup Server

You should set up at least on Proxmox Backup Server (PBS) in your cluster.  It's a game changer.  

PBS's are what you probably think they are.  The aren't servers that do backups.  Backups are still done from the Proxmox node systems.  What a PBS actually *is*, is an intelligent backup storage server.  You set up a PBS server, and then you set up you set up your cluster with the PBS devices as a data store, then you configure backup jobs on your node systems to use that data store as a destination storage device.  

At this point, Proxmox knows to use the PBS client software to do the actual backup, and the data gets sent to your PBS server.  

One thing to note about this is that the PBS server uses data deduplication.  Your backup data is carved up into "chunks", and the chunks are stored on disk.  The backup itself consists of a bunch of references to individual chunks.  

Here's the cool part, if the PBS server detects that a chunk of backup data is identical to a chunk that it already has on file, it won't store a second copy.  It just includes a reference to the chunk that it found on file in the backup instead.  

The chunks themselves are not independently associated with any particular guest image, nor of any particular backup run.  This means that if you have a pantload of LXC's or VM's that are all based on the template, they are all going to have a lot of their data spaces that duplicate across each other.  And that leads to a lot of backup chunks that are identical between those images.

Also, if you backup an LXC or VM every night, there's likely only going to be a small amount of data that actually changes from day to day.  For some services that you're running, it might only be some log files.  This means that actual amount of new chunks that are created each day is relatively small - tiny even.  

PBS also supplies the ability to schedule validation, pruning and cleanup of your backup data.
